BM 32312
========

Origin: Acquired by the British Museum in 1876 \[1\].

First publication: in 1974 by A J Sachs \[2, p. 48\].

Also known as ADT I Diary No. -651.

Translation
-----------

    Upper edge
    1  [At the command of ....] Bēl? may it be well.
    Col.i
    1  [Month I, ....,] the moon became visible in a cloud; it was bright? and high.
    2  [Beginn]ing of the night, overcast. Night of the 1st, the river level rose. The 1st, the sun was surrounded by a halo. Night
    3  of the 2nd, (and) the 2nd, overcast. The south wind blew. The 3rd, very overcast. In the afternoon it rained.
    4  Night of the 4th, (and) the 4th, it rained. The 6th, middle part of the day, the sun was surrounded by a halo.
    5  It was split towards the east. The 7th, the moon was surrounded by a halo. The river level rose.
    6  Night of the 12th, overcast. The 12th, the 13th, the 14th, overcast. The 14th, one god was seen with the other.
    7  The river level receded. Mercury's last appearance in the east behind Pisces,
    8  and Saturn's last appearance behind Pisces; I did not watch because the days were overcast.
    9  The 17th, in the morning, overcast. Thunder, gusty south wind, rain, small (hail)stones.
    10 Mars became stationary in the area of the Lip of the Scorpion, it came close to the bright star
    11 of the Scorpion's head. From the 22nd to the 24th, [....]
    12 The 25th, Mars was east of the star to the right of the Scorpion [....]
    13 The river level rose. Night of the 20th, overcast. Lightning, thun[der, ....]
    14 a little [....], strong wind. Night of the 21st, rain [....]
    15 A little rain, lightning flashed, the south wind [....]
    16 2 cubits in front of the Scales. .... [....]
    17 to the right of the Scorpion 1? [....]
    18 .... The sun set in a cloud. .... [....]
    19 It rained slowly, the south wind [....]
    20 [....] night [....]
       (rest of column broken)
    Col. ii
    1  The north wind blew. The 15th, an eclipse? [....]
    2  first appearance in the Old Man. The river level [....]
    3  was placed towards the south. .... [....]
    4  first part of the night, .... [....]
    5  .... [....]
    6  .... [....]
       (rest of column broken)
    Col. iii
    1'  of .... [....]
    2'  in the after[noon ....]
    3'  .... [....]
    4'  The north wind blew. Lunar eclipse .... [....]
    5'  The 20th?, the moon was surrounded by a halo, (and) Mercury [stood] in i[t ....]
    6'  strong wind. The 21st, .... [....]
    Col. iv
    1'  [....] the star of [....]
    2'  [....] .... right? of the moon [....]
    3'  [....] .... [....]
    4'  [....] .... [....]
    5'  [....] .... right of the moon? .... [....]
    6'  [....] .... thunder, [....]
    7'  .... The 5th, Mercury's first appearance in the east in Pisces [....]
    8'  .... towards the south [....]
    9'  .... It rained slowly. The 12th, a halo .... The river level rose [....]
    10' The troops of Babylonia fought against the troops of Assyria; the troops .... [....]
    11' The 13th, the river level rose a little. The 14th, a cloud bank lay to the right of the sun. Night of the 15th, overcast. Three ra[inbows,]
    12' one in the west, one between north and west, and one in the north, were seen. Rain, lightning, thunder, ....
    13' clouds?. The 15th, one god was seen with the other. Gusty south wind, haze crossed the face of the sky. Night of the 16th, the moon was surrounded by a large halo.
    14' The 16th, the sun was surrounded by a halo. The 18th, the sun was surrounded by a ... halo; the south wind blew. The 19th, Venus
    15' stood in the region of Aries, 10 fingers behind Mars; the moon was surrounded by a halo, and α Scorpii stood in it. The 20th, Mars was 1 finger to the left
    16' of the front? of Aries; it came close. The moon was surrounded by a halo, Jupiter stood in it. The south wind blew.
    17' [....] .... The 27th, a rainbow whose brightness was very great stretched in the east.
    18' [.... in] Hiritu in the province of Sippar the troops of Babylonia and of Assyria fou[ght with each] other, and the troops of Babylonia withdrew and were heavily defeated.
    20' [.... The no]rth wind blew. The 28th a little rain. In the afternoon a very red? rainbow stretched in the east.
    21' [....] The 27th, the river level rose a little. A rain shower fell. That year little rain .... [....]

\[3, p. 43\]

Observations
------------

Since the text is missing I will allow Col.i. Line 1 to refer to any
month, the only assumption being made is that the text is part of a
single year.

Col.i. Line 7  
Month A, day 14:  
`Mercury's last appearance in the east behind Pisces` (ML)

Col.i. Line 8  
Month A, day 14:  
`Saturn's last appearance behind Pisces` (LA)

Col.i. Line 10-11  
Month A, day 17:  
`Mars became stationary in the area of the Lip of the Scorpion, it came close to the bright star of the Scorpion's head`

Col.iv. Line 7  
Month B, day 5:  
`Mercury's first appearance in the east in Pisces` (MF)

Col.iv. Line 14-15  
Month B, day 19:  
`Venus stood in the region of Aries, 10 fingers behind Mars`

Col.iv. Line 15-16  
Month B, day 20:  
`Mars was 1 finger to the left of the front? of Aries`

Results
-------

When testing years in the range -701 to -601 the best match is -651:

    Year   Score
    -651 10.956387753116433
    -652 8.956873273309355
    -619 7.532635147995537
    -658 7.114233759515745
    -622 6.999999999969808
    ...
    -671 5.12663456971738
    -672 5.124578166941687
    -670 5.0

### Calendar

(Matched = Date of sunset on Julian calendar)

<table>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th>Calendar Date</th>
<th>Event</th>
<th>Matched</th>
<th>Comment</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td>1/I</td>
<td>Calendar: First day of year</td>
<td>-651-03-23</td>
<td>Equinox on March 28</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>1/I</td>
<td>Calendar: Lunar Visibility</td>
<td>-651-03-23</td>
<td>Earliest visibility March 22</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>14/I</td>
<td>Mercury ML</td>
<td>-651-04-05</td>
<td>ML on April 09</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>14/I</td>
<td>Mercury in Pisces</td>
<td>-651-04-05</td>
<td>Mercury 11.4° below 58 Piscium</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>14/I</td>
<td>Saturn LA</td>
<td>-651-04-05</td>
<td>LA on April 01</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>14/I</td>
<td>Saturn in Pisces</td>
<td>-651-04-05</td>
<td>Saturn 38.0° behind 58 Piscium</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>17/I</td>
<td>Mars Stationary</td>
<td>-651-04-08</td>
<td>Stationary on March 19</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>17/I</td>
<td>Mars near Scorpions Head</td>
<td>-651-04-08</td>
<td>Mars 7° from Antares</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>1/XII</td>
<td>Calendar: Lunar Visibility</td>
<td>-650-02-11</td>
<td>Earliest visibility February 10</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>5/XII</td>
<td>Mercury MF</td>
<td>-650-02-15</td>
<td>MF on February 14</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>5/XII</td>
<td>Mercury in Pisces</td>
<td>-650-02-15</td>
<td>Mercury 37.3° ahead of 58 Piscium</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>19/XII</td>
<td>Venus 0.9° fingers behind Mars</td>
<td>-650-03-01</td>
<td>Venus 0.4° behind Mars</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>19/XII</td>
<td>Venus and Mars in Aries</td>
<td>-650-03-01</td>
<td>Mars 6.0° below Nu Arietis</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>20/XII</td>
<td>Mars in Aries</td>
<td>-650-03-02</td>
<td>Mars 6.1° below Nu Arietis</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

These results match with the work of A J Sachs and H Hunger \[3, p.
47\]:

> This date \[-651\] is independently confirmed by the following
> astronomical events mentioned in the present diary: Last appearance of
> Mercury in the east behind Pisces and last appearance of Saturn behind
> Pisces (both around the 14th of month I); stationary point of Mars in
> Scorpius (17th of month I); first appearance of Mercury in Pisces (5th
> of month XII).

Chronology
----------

Notice in the month matched to Addaru (Col. iv):

    17' [....] .... The 27th, a rainbow whose brightness was very great stretched in the east.
    18' [.... in] Hiritu in the province of Sippar the troops of Babylonia and of Assyria fou[ght with each] other, and the troops of Babylonia withdrew and were heavily defeated.

Now compare with the Akitu Chronicle \[4, p. 131\] (BM 86379 \[5\]):

    9 The sixteenth year of Shamash-shumaukin:
      ...
    13 On the twenty-seventh day of Adar the armies of Assyria and Akkad
    14 did battle in Hirit. The army of Akkad
    15 retreated from the battlefield and a major defeat was inflicted upon them.

According to Brinkman \[6, p. 96\]:

> There is no doubt that these sources are describing the same battle,
> since the date, place, identities of the combatants, and name of the
> winner match.

The tablet can therefore be dated to Shamash-shum-ukin year 16 \[3, p.
47\].

References
----------

\[1\] “BM32312,” *The British Museum*. \[Online\]. Available:
<https://www.britishmuseum.org/collection/object/W_1876-1117-2041>.

\[2\] A. Sachs, “Babylonian observational astronomy,” *Philosophical
Transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series A*, vol. 276, no.
1257, pp. 43–50, 1974, \[Online\]. Available:
<https://www.jstor.org/stable/74273>.

\[3\] H. Hunger and A. J. Sachs, *Astronomical diaries and related texts
from Babylonia. Vol. 1, Diaries from 652 B.C. to 262 B.C. : Plates*.
Verlag der Österreichischen Akademie der Wissenschaften, 1988.

\[4\] A. K. Grayson, *Assyrian and Babylonian Chronicles*. Eisenbrauns,
1975, \[Online\]. Available:
<https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=ydcGZA6k5nwC>.

\[5\] “BM86379,” *The British Museum*. \[Online\]. Available:
<https://www.britishmuseum.org/collection/object/W_1899-0610-109>.

\[6\] J. A. Brinkman, “The Babylonian chronicle revisited,” *Lingering
over Words: Studies in Ancient Near Eastern Literature in Honor of
William L. Moran*, pp. 73–104, 1990.
