BM 32234
========

Origin: Acquired by the British Museum in 1876 \[1\].

First Published: 1955 by T G Pinches as LBAT 1419 \[2\].

Also known as ADT V Lunar Text No.4.

Translation
-----------

    'Obv.'
    I'
    1' [Year 17 (of Nabopolassar). month VI. the 1]4th?. ....
    2' [....] .... in 20°
    3' [....x]+4°? maximal phase:
    4' [.... it cleared from] east to west
    5' [....] night
    6' [....] was visible
    7' [.... re]mainder?
    8' [.... after sun]set?.

    II'
    1' [ .... Vir]go?
    2' [At] 30° before sunset.
    3' (Year) 14 of Nebukadnezar
    4' month VI, (eclipse) which was omitted.
    5' With sunrise.
    6' [Mon]th XII, the 14th, (eclipse) which was omitted.
    7' .... after? sunrise?.

    III'
    1'  [Month XII, ....]
    2'  [....] ....
    3'  it cleared [from] east to north.
    4'  The south wind blew. I cubit
    5'  in front of Libra it was eclipsed.
    6'  Saturn rose in Capricorn; Mars
    7'  was 2 cubits in front of a Scorpii.
    8'  At 1,30° after sunset.
    9'  (Year) 32 of Nebukadnezar,
    10' month VI, (eclipse) which was omitted.
    11' At 35° before sunset.
    12' Month XII, the 15th?, ....
    13' .... [....]

    IV'
    1' [....] .... [....]
    2' Month VII, the 13th, in 17° on the east side'
    3' all was covered; 28° maximal phase.
    4' In 20° it cleared from east to west.
    5' Its eclipse was red.
    6' Behind the rump of Aries it was eelipsed.
    7' During onset, the north wind blew, during clearing. the west wind.
    8' At 55° before sunrise.
    9' Month XII₂, the 15th [....]

    V'
    1'  cleared [....]
    2'  to .... [....]
    3'  eclipsed .... [....]
    4'  Month VII, the 11+[xth, ....]
    5'  ⅔ of the disk to tota[lity ....]
    6'  not total, it set eclipsed.
    7'  The north wind which was set to the west side
    8'  blew. 5°
    9'  in front of η Tauri it was eclipsed.
    10' At 14° before [sunrise].

    'Rev.'
    I'
    1' [....] night? to?
    2' [....] ....
    3' [.... before?] sunset?.
    4' [When I watched? I did not?] see (it).

    II'
    1' Month VIII, the 13th, in O;15 bēru
    2' all was covered; 25° maximal phase.
    3' In 25° it cleared from east to west;
    4' it was red. During onset, the north wind <blew>.
    5' [during] clearing, the south wind. At 1?,17°
    6' after sunset.

    III'
    1' Month VIII. the 13th. it began on the south side;
    2' I did not watch the maximal phase; it set eclipsed.
    3' In the eclipse. Venus stood there:
    4' the remainder of the planets
    5' did not stand there.
    6' At 10° before sunrise.

    IV'
    1' at 18°? [....]
    2' 40° onset, ma[ximal phase. and clearing]. The "garment of the sky" was there.
    3' In the area of the 4 rear stars of Sagittarius, it was eclipsed. Month VI was intercalary.
    4' Month V, the 14th?, Xerxes - his son killed him.
    5' Month VIII, the 14th, 13° after
    6' sunset, (the moon) came out of a cloud,
    7' one-fourth of the disk on the [....]
    8' and west side was covered. 8°? [onset? and]
    9' clearing .... [....]

    V'
    1' Month IX, the xth, [....]
    2' .... [....]

\[3, p. 16\]

References
----------

\[1\] “Tablet,” *The British Museum*. \[Online\]. Available:
<https://www.britishmuseum.org/collection/object/W_1876-1117-1961>.

\[2\] T. G. Pinches, A. J. Sachs, and J. N. Strassmaier, *Late
babylonian astronomical and related texts: Copied by t.g. Pinches and
j.n. Strassmaier*. Brown University Press, 1955.

\[3\] H. Hunger, *Astronomical diaries and related texts from babylonia.
Volume v, lunar and planetary texts*. Verlag der Österreichischen
Akademie der Wissenschaften, 2001.
