BM 35115, 35789, 45640
======================

Origin: A tablet made up of three joining pieces, BM 35115, BM 35789 and
BM 45640, acquired by the British Museum in 1879 and 1881 \[1\].

First Published: 1955 by T G Pinches as LBAT 1415, 1416 and 1417 \[2\]

Also known as ADT V Lunar Text No.3.

Translation
-----------

    Obv.
    I'
    1' [....] after sunrise?
    2' [....] .... (Year) 1? of Bēl-ibni
    3' [....] to between south
    4' [....] it set eclipsed.
    5' [At .... before sunri]se.

    II'
    1 [....] ....
    2 [Month II?,] (after) 5 months ...., between
    3 [nor]th and east it began; two-thirds of the disk
    4 [was covered?. The we]st? wind blew.
    5 [At] 1,40°
    6 [after sun]set.
    7 [Month VI] was intercalary.
    8 [....1]4? .... which was omitted.
    9 [At ....] after sunrise.
    (break)
    1' [....] ....
    2' all? was covered. In 6°?
    3' middle of Aries .... The south wind
    4' blew. At 20° after sunset.
    5' (Year) 5, [month I], the 15th, (eclipse) which was omitted.
    6' At [x]+10° after sunrise.

    III' 
    1 Accession year of Šamaš-šumu-ukīn.
    2 month II, (after) 5 months;
    3 (eclipse) which was omitted.
    4 At 40° after sunrise.
    5 Month VIII, (eclipse) which was omitted.
    6 At 30° before sunset.
    (break)
    1' .... [....]
    2' It set eclipsed. At 20°+[x]
    3' before sunrise.
    4' (Year) 2, month I, the 14th, ....
    5' began?. At 3°? [....]
    6' after sunset.

    IV'
    1 (Year) 18 of Šamaš-šumu-ukīn,
    2 month II, (after) 5 months,
    3 (eclipse) which was omitted.
    4 At 1,0° before sunset.
    5 Month VIII, the 13th, .... [....]
    6 and south [....]
    7 .... [....]
    8 .... [....]

    V'
    1 (Year) 16 of Kandalānu,
    2 month III, (after) 5 months, the 15th, 2 fin[gers?]
    3 between north and east were covered.
    4 It cleared in the north. The north wind b[lew?.]
    5 20° onset, maximal phase, [and clearing ....]
    6 behind α Scorpii [it was eclipsed.]

    Rev.
    I'
    1'  [....] which was omitted.
    2'  [At] 12°? before sunset.
    3'  [.... the 1]4th, moonrise to sunset: 1°;
    4'  [....] ....
    5'  [....] ....
    6'  [....] after sunset.
    7'  [....] .... it was eclipsed.
    8'  [....] .... 10?
    9'  [....] clouds?
    10' [....] not seen
    11' [....] seen
    12' [.... be]fore sunrise.
    13' [....] ....

    II'
    1'  [....] omitted [....]
    2'  Month XII₂, the 14th,
    3'  it began on the south side.
    4'  one-fourth of the disk was covered.
    5'  It cleared to the west. 27°
    6'  onset, maximal phase. and clearing.
    7'  The "garment of the sky" was there. the south wind blew.
    8'  At 48° after sunset.
    9'  (Year) 8, month VI. the 14th, 1 ½
    10' fingers? ....
    11' At 1,20° before sunrise.
    12' Month XII, the 14th, (eclipse) which was omitted.
    13' At ⅓ bēru before sunset.
    14' (Year) 9, month VI, the 13th,
    15' [....] ....

    III'
    1'  .... [....]
    2'  At 20° after sunrise.
    3'  (Year) 26, month I, the 12+[xth,]
    4'  it began on the east side; it set eclipsed.
    5'  1 ⅔ cubits in front of β
    6'  Capricorni it was eclipsed. The north wind which was
    7'  set to the east side blew.
    8'  At 10°
    9'  before sunrise.
    10' Month VII, the 13th. (eclipse) which was omitted.
    11' At 12°? after sunrise.
    12' Month XII₂, the 15th. when it began on the south side.
    13' in 15° all was covered. 21°
    14' maximal phase. When it began to clear from the east.
    15' it cleared in 19° of night to the west.
    16' 55°' onset, maximal phase. and clearing.
    17' 14 fingers in front of α Librae
    18' it was edipsed. (In) its eclipse. the w[est? wind]
    19' which was slanted to tle south [blew.]
    20' At 37° [after sunset.]
    21' (Year) 2[7, ....]

    IV'
    1' [....] .... [....]
    2' (Year) 45, month I, the 10+[xth, ....]
    3' to sunrise .... [....]
    4' from .... [....]
    5' .... [....]

\[3, p. 8\]

Observations
------------

Obv. Col III  
II/Acc. Shamash-shum-ukin  

    1 Accession year of Šamaš-šumu-ukīn.
    2 month II, (after) 5 months;
    3 (eclipse) which was omitted.
    4 At 40° after sunrise.

Obv. Col III  
VIII/Acc. Shamash-shum-ukin  

    5 Month VIII, (eclipse) which was omitted.
    6 At 30° before sunset.

Obv. Col III  
14/I/2 Shamash-shum-ukin  

    4' (Year) 2, month I, the 14th, ....
    5' began?. At 3°? [....]
    6' after sunset.

Obv. Col IV  
II/18 Shamash-shum-ukin  

    1 (Year) 18 of Šamaš-šumu-ukīn,
    2 month II, (after) 5 months,
    3 (eclipse) which was omitted.
    4 At 1,0° before sunset.

Obv. Col IV  
VIII/18 Shamash-shum-ukin  

    5 Month VIII, the 13th, .... [....]
    6 and south [....]
    7 .... [....]
    8 .... [....]

Obv. Col V  
III/16 Kandalanu  

    1 (Year) 16 of Kandalānu,
    2 month III, (after) 5 months, the 15th, 2 fin[gers?]
    3 between north and east were covered.
    4 It cleared in the north. The north wind b[lew?.]
    5 20° onset, maximal phase, [and clearing ....]
    6 behind α Scorpii [it was eclipsed.]

Chronology
----------

According to H Hunger \[3, p. 391\] this tablet is part of a series that
are:

> arranged in columns such that each entry in a column is separated from
> the entry in the preceding column by one Saros of 18 years

We can therefore deduce the length of Shamash-shum-ukin’s reign as 20
years long (based on Col IV’. 1 and Col V’. 1).

References
----------

\[1\] “Joined tablet group: G15700,” *The British Museum*. \[Online\].
Available: <https://www.britishmuseum.org/collection/group/G15700>.

\[2\] T. G. Pinches, A. J. Sachs, and J. N. Strassmaier, *Late
babylonian astronomical and related texts: Copied by t.g. Pinches and
j.n. Strassmaier*. Brown University Press, 1955.

\[3\] H. Hunger, *Astronomical diaries and related texts from babylonia.
Volume v, lunar and planetary texts*. Verlag der Österreichischen
Akademie der Wissenschaften, 2001.
