BM 38462
========

Origin: Acquired by the British Museum in 1880 \[1\].

First Published: 1955 by T G Pinches as LBAT 1420 \[2\].

Also known as ADT V Lunar Text No.6.

Translation
-----------

    Obv.'
    I
    1  [Year I of Nebukad]nezar. Month III, omitted.
    2  [Month IX,] omitted.
    3  [Year 2. Month II,] (after) 5? (months), omitted. Month VI was intercalary.
    4  [Month VII, the 1]4th?, 1 ⅔ bēru 5°, variant 1 ½ bēru, after sunset,
    5  it began in the [....] north; half was covered. In the north and west it began
    6  [to cl]ear. [1] ½ bēru onset and clearing. The west wind blew.
    7  [Year 3.] Month I, omitted. Month VII, omitted.
    8  [Year 4. M]onth I, the 13th, middle watch, 3 bēru 5° after sunset,
    9  it began in the west and north. Three quarters
    10 [was covered.] It cleared in the north. The north wind blew.
    11 Month VII, omitted.
    12 [Year 5. Month I, omitted.] Month VI₂, om[itted.]
    13 [Month XI,] (after) 5 months, 3 ½ bēru after sunset,
    14 [....] two-thirds was covered. In the south it was covered. In the west? [it cleared.]
    15 [In?] its eclipse, .... [....]
    16 [....] .... [....]
    II
    1  Month VIII, [....] .... [....]
    2  It cleared [in the west] and south [....] ⅔ bēru after [sunset?]
    3  Year 11. Month II, [....] 10° after sunset it began
    4  it was total, and 10? [....] Month VIII, omitted. Month XII was intercalary.
    5  Year 12. Month [I, omitted] Month VII. omitted.
    6  Month XII, the 15th. 10? [....nn]° after sunset [....]
    7  1 bēru 6° onset [and clearing.]
    8  Year 13. Month VI, [omitted]
    9  [Month XII, the 1]4th. it came out eclipsed. I bēru 10° [....]
    10 [Year 1]4. [Month] VI, [omitted.]
    11 [Month XII. omitt]ed .... Month XII [was intercalary]
    12 [Year 1]5. Month V, [omitt]ed. Month X[I, omitted.]
    13 [Year] 16. Month IV, [omitted.]
    14 [Month X,] the 14th. morning watch. ⅔ bēru before sunrise?.
    15 half of it was covered. [It set] eclipsed.
    16 [Year] 17. Month IV, [omitted.]
    17 [Month] X, the 13th, morning watch. 1 bēru 5° [before sunrise?]
    18 all of it was covered. [It set eclips]ed.

    Rev.
    III
    1'  [....] .... [....]
    2'  .... beginning of night, onset [....]
    3'  Year 25. Month V, 1 ½ bēru after sunset.
    4'  Month XI, evening watch, onset.
    5'  Year 26. Month V, omitted. Month XI, omitted. Month XII was intercalary.
    6'  Year 27. Month III, (after) 5 (months), omitted. Month IX, omitted.
    7'  Year 28. Month III, the 14th, ....
    8'  [....] .... [....] finger remaining
    9'  [....nn]°, it set eclipsed.
    10' [Month IX, the 1]5th? 3 ½ bēru after sunset,
    11' it began [in] the east. All of it was covered.
    12· It cleared? in the west?. [nn] bēru onset and clearing.
    13' Year 29. [Mon]th II, the 14th, [....]
    14' 1 bēru 10° before sunrise,
    15' [....]

\[3, p. 26\]

References
----------

\[1\] “Tablet,” *The British Museum*. \[Online\]. Available:
<https://www.britishmuseum.org/collection/object/W_1880-1112-345>.

\[2\] T. G. Pinches, A. J. Sachs, and J. N. Strassmaier, *Late
babylonian astronomical and related texts: Copied by t.g. Pinches and
j.n. Strassmaier*. Brown University Press, 1955.

\[3\] H. Hunger, *Astronomical diaries and related texts from babylonia.
Volume v, lunar and planetary texts*. Verlag der Österreichischen
Akademie der Wissenschaften, 2001.
