VAT 4956
========

(VAT = tablets in the collections of the Staatliche Museen, Berlin)

Origin: Excavated by antiquities dealers near the end of the 19th
century, purchased by Vorderasiatisches Museum (Berlin) around 1907 \[1,
p. 141\].

First Translated: 1915 by P Neugebauer and E Weidner \[2, p. 29\]

Also known as ADT I Diary No. -567 \[3, p. 46\]

Translation
-----------

    Obverse
    1  Year 37 of Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon, Nisannu, the 30th, Sîn appeared behind the Bull of Heaven, [NA] was ... [...]
    2  Kajjamānu was in front of the Swallow. The 2nd, in the morning a rainbow stretched in the west. Night of the 3rd, Sîn was 2 cubits in front of [...]
    3  it rained. Night of the 9th, beginning of the night, Sîn stood 1 cubit in front of the Rear Foot of the Lion. The 9th, while setting Šamaš [was surrounded by] a ‘fol[d’ ... The 11th]
    4  or the 12th Sagmegar ‘rose to daylight’. The 14th, one god was seen with the (other) god, NA was 4. The 15th, overcast. The 16th, Dilbat [...]
    5  The 20th, in the morning Šamaš was surrounded by a ‘fold’. Noon, UGU.ME, rain, PISAN, a rainbow stretched in the east ... [...]
    6  From the 8th of second Addaru until the 28th, the river level rose by 3 cubits 8 fingers; 2/3 of a cubit [were lacking] to the ˹peak˺ river level [...]
    7  were killed on the order of the king. That month, a fox entered the city. A little su'ālu disease and rišûtu disease [...]
    8  Ajjaru, the 1st, while Šamaš was present Sîn appeared below the Rear Bright Star of the Large Twins. It was thick, covered with a ‘crown’ [...]
    9  Kajjamānu was in front of the Swallow. Šiḫṭu, which had set, was not visible. Night of the 1st, a ŠAR2 storm from east and south. The 1st, all day [...]
    10 stood [in front of] Dilbat to the west. The 2nd, a ŠAR2 north wind blew. The 3rd, Ṣalbaṭānu entered the Crab, the 5th it emerged. The 10th, Šiḫṭu [rose] in the west behind the [Little] Twins [...]
    11 The 15th, ZI IR. The 18th, Dilbat was ‘balanced’ 1 cubit 4 fingers above the King. The 26th (KUR) was 23, I did not observe Sîn. The 27th, [KUR] was 20[+x...]
    12 Simānu, the 30th, Sîn appeared behind the Crab, it was thick, NA was 20, the northwind blew. At that time, Ṣalba-ṭānu and Šiḫṭu were 4 cubits in front of the K[ing ...]
    13 In the evening, Šiḫṭu passed below Ṣalbaṭānu, Sagmegar was above Lisi, Dilbat was in the west, opposite the Tail of the Li[on ...]
    14 by 1 cubit. Night of the 5th, beginning of the night, Sîn passed towards the east 1 cubit ‹above/below› the Bright Star at the Tip of the Lion’s Foot. Night of the 6th, beginning of the night [...]
    15 was low. Night of the 8th, evening watch, Sîn stood 2 1/2 cubits below the Northern Part of the Scales. Night of the 9th, evening watch, Sîn was 1 cubit in front of [...]
    16 passed towards the east. The 9th, Šamaš ‘stood still’. Night of the 10th, evening watch, Sîn was ‘balanced’ 3 1/2 cubits above Lisi. The 12th, Ṣalbaṭānu was 2/3 of a cubit ˹above˺ [the King ...]
    17 [...] ... The 15th, (one) god was seen with the (other) god, NA was 7;30. ˹An eclipse of Sîn which passed by˺ [...]
    18 [... bel]ow the Bright Star at the Tip of the [Lion’s Foot ...]
    Reverse
    1'  [...] ... evening [watch, ... Sîn was above/below]
    2'  the Middle Star [of the El]˹bow of Pabilsag by 1 cubit˺ ... [...]
    3'  Daylight having risen by 5 UŠ, Šamaš was surrounded by a ‘fold’. The 19th, Dilbat was below the Middle Star of the Horn of the Goat [...]
    4'  That month the exchange value of barley was 1 kur 2 sūt, of dates 1 kur 1 pān 2 sūt, of kasû mustard 1 kur ... [... for 1 shekel of silver.]
    5'  Šabātu, the 30th, Sîn appeared in the Swallow, NA was 14;30. The north wind blew. At that time, Sagmegar was behind the Elbow of Pabi[lsag by ... cubits ...]
    6'  The 4th, the river level rose. The 4th, Dilbat was ‘balanced’ 1/2 cubit below the Goat-Fish. Night of the 6th, evening watch, Sîn was surrounded by a ‘fold’, the Bristle, the Bull of Heaven, the Chariot [stood within the ‘fold’ ...]
    7'  Sîn was surrounded by a ‘fold’; the Lion and the Crab were inside {inside} the ‘fold’. The King was ‘balanced’ 1 cubit below Sîn. Morning watch, 3 UŠ of night remaining, [...]
    8'  NA was 7, I did not observe it. Šamaš was surrounded by a ‘fold’. From the 4th until the 15th the river level rose by 1 1/2 cubit; the 16th it receded. Night of the 18th, the 18th: rain, PISAN DI[B ...].
    9'  of Bēl from its place when they were cut off. Two boats of old? reeds were unloaded. The 22nd, overcast. Night of the 23rd [...]
    10' was ‘balanced’ above the Small Star which stands 3 1/2 cubits behind the Goat-Fish. Night of the 29th, akūkūtuglow flared in the west, 2 bē[ru ... That month, the exchange value]
    11' of barley was {1} 1 kur {kur}, of dates 1 kur 1 pān 4 sūt, of kasû mustard 1 kur 1 pān, of sesame 4 sūt, of saḫl[û cress ... for 1 shekel of silver ...]
    12' Addaru, the 1st, Sîn appeared behind the Hired Man while Šamaš was present, NA was 25, MUŠ, he was covered with a ‘crown’. The north wind blew. At that time Sagmegar [... Šiḫṭu and Kajjamānu, which had set,]
    13' were not visible. The 1st, the river level rose. Night of the 2nd, the evening watch, Sîn was ‘balanced’ 4 cubits below the Stars. Night of the 3rd, beginning of the night, 2 1/2 cubits [...]
    14' From the 1st until the 5th the river level rose by 8 fingers, the 6th it receded. Night of the 7th, Sîn was surrounded by a ‘fold’, the Crab and the King were within [the ‘fold’, ...]
    15' The ‘fold’ surrounded the Crab, the Lion, it was split to the north. Within the ‘fold’, Sîn stood 1 cubit in front of - broken - Sîn being high by 1 cubit. Night of the 10th, evening wa[tch ...]
    16' Night of the 11th, overcast. The 11th, rain DUL. Night of the 12th, a little rain, UGU.ME. The 12th, one god was seen with the (other) god, NA was 1;30. UGU.ME, DUL [...]
    17' was in front of the Band of the Swallow, 1/2 cubit below Dilbat, Šiḫṭu passing 8 fingers to the east, when it appeared it was bright and high. 1 U[Š ... Kajjamānu]
    18' was ‘balanced’ 6 fingers above Šiḫṭu and 3 fingers below Dilbat, and Ṣalba-ṭānu was ‘balanced’ 2/3 of a cubit below the Bright Star of – broken – to [...]
    19' UGU.ME DUL. The 21st: overcast. The river level rose. Around the 20th Dilbat and Šiḫṭu entered the Band of the Swallow. From [... Sagmegar,]
    20' which passed to the east, became stationary. At the end of the month it reversed to the west. Around the 26th Šiḫṭu and Dilbat [came] out of the Band of Anun[ītu ...]
    21' The river level receded by 8 fingers. That month, the 26th a wolf entered Borsippa and killed two dogs. It did not come out, it was kill[ed ...]
    Lower edge
    1  Year 38 of Nebuchadnezzar, Nisannu, the 30th, dense clouds, so that [Sîn was not visible ...]
    2  [Year 37 of Nebucha]dnezzar.

\[1, p. 144\]

Planet Identification
---------------------

> I have found that all the names attested for the seven planets in the
> period c. 750-612 BC can be placed into five categories. ~ D Brown
> \[4, p. 54\]

> A - Names unique to the planet ( amongst celestial bodies) and which
> can be used under any circumstances.

> B - Names shared only with other planets and usable under any
> circumstances

<table>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th>Name</th>
<th>Identity</th>
<th>Category</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Sagmegar</td>
<td>Jupiter</td>
<td>A</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Delebat</td>
<td>Venus</td>
<td>A</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Ṣalbatānu</td>
<td>Mars</td>
<td>A</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Šiḫṭu</td>
<td>Mercury</td>
<td>A</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Kaiamānu</td>
<td>Saturn</td>
<td>A</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Šamšu</td>
<td>Sun</td>
<td>A</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Šamaš</td>
<td>Sun (usually), Saturn (occasionally)</td>
<td>B</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Sîn</td>
<td>Moon</td>
<td>A</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

Observations
------------

NW = Neugebauer and Weidner

### Month I

Obv. Line 1 (NW Lunar 1)  
1/I/37  
`Nisannu, (the 1st of which was identical with) the 30th, Sîn (Moon) appeared behind the Bull of Heaven (Taurus)`

Obv. Line 2 (NW Planetary 18)  
1/I/37  
`Kajjamānu (Saturn) was in front of the Swallow (Pisces).`

Obv. Line 3 (NW Lunar 2)  
9/I/37  
`Night of the 9th, beginning of the night, Sîn (Moon) stood 1 cubit in front of the Rear Foot of the Lion (β Virginis).`

Obv. Line 3-4 (NW Planetary 19)  
11-12/I/37  
`The 11th] or the 12th Sagmegar (Jupiter) ‘rose to daylight’ (AR).`

Obv. Line 4 (Lunar Six 1)  
14/I/37  
`NA (sunrise to moonset) was 4.`

### Month II

Obv. Line 8 (NW Lunar 4)  
1/II/37  
`Ajjaru, the 1st (the preceding month had 30 days), while Šamaš (Sun) was present Sîn (Moon) appeared below the Rear Bright Star of the Large Twins (β Geminorum).`

Obv. Line 9 (NW Planetary 20)  
1/II/37  
`Kajjamānu (Saturn) was in front of the Swallow (Pisces).`

Obv. Line 10 (NW Planetary 22)  
3-5/II/37  
`The 3rd, Ṣalbaṭānu (Mars) entered the Crab (Praesepe), the 5th it emerged.`

Obv. Line 10 (NW Planetary 23)  
10/II/37  
`The 10th, Šiḫṭu (Mercury) [rose] in the west (EF) behind the [Little] Twins [...] (Gemini)`

Obv. Line 11 (NW Planetary 24)  
18/II/37  
`The 18th, Dilbat (Venus) was ‘balanced’ 1 cubit 4 fingers above the King (Regulus).`

Obv. Line 11 (Lunar Six 2)  
26/II/37  
`The 26th (KUR) (moonrise to sunrise) was 23, I did not observe Sîn.`

### Month III

Obv. Line 12 (NW Lunar 5)  
1/III/37  
`Simānu, (the 1st of which was identical with) the 30th, Sîn (Moon) appeared behind the Crab (Cancer);`

Obv. Line 12 (Lunar Six 3)  
1/III/37  
`NA (sunset to moonset) was 20`

Obv. Line 12-13 (NW Planetary 25)  
1/III/37  
`At that time, Ṣalba-ṭānu (Mars) and Šiḫṭu (Mercury) were 4 cubits in front of the K[ing ...] (Regulus) In the evening, Šiḫṭu (Mercury) passed below Ṣalbaṭānu (Mars)`

Obv. Line 13 (NW Planetary 26)  
1/III/37  
`Sagmegar (Jupiter) was above Lisi (Antares)`

Obv. Line 13 (NW Planetary 27)  
1/III/37  
`Dilbat (Venus) was in the west, opposite the Tail of the Li[on ...] (θ Leonis)`

Obv. Line 14 (NW Lunar 6)  
5/III/37  
`Night of the 5th, beginning of the night, Sîn (Moon) passed towards the east 1 cubit ‹above/below› the Bright Star at the Tip of the Lion’s Foot. (Leo)`

Obv. Line 15 (NW Lunar 7)  
8/III/37  
`Night of the 8th, evening watch, Sîn (Moon) stood 2 1/2 cubits below the Northern Part of the Scales (β Librae).`

Obv. Line 16 (NW Lunar 8)  
10/III/37  
`Night of the 10th, evening watch, Sîn (Moon) was ‘balanced’ 3 1/2 cubits above Lisi (Antares).`

Obv. Line 16 (NW Planetary 28)  
12/III/37  
`The 12th, Ṣalbaṭānu (Mars) was 2/3 of a cubit ˹above˺ [the King ...] (Regulus)`

Obv. Line 17 (Lunar Six 4)  
15/III/37  
`The 15th, (one) god was seen with the (other) god, NA (sunrise to moonset) was 7;30`

Obv. Line 17 (NW Lunar 10)  
15/III/37  
`An eclipse of Sîn (Moon) which passed by`

### Month X

Rev. Line 3 (NW Planetary 29)  
19/X/37  
`The 19th, Dilbat (Venus) was below the Middle Star of the Horn of the Goat [...] (β Capricorni)`

### Month XI

Rev. Line 5 (NW Lunar 11)  
1/XI/37  
`Šabātu, (the 1st of which was identical with) the 30th (of the preceding month), Sîn (Moon) appeared in the Swallow (Pisces)`

Rev. Line 5 (Lunar Six 5)  
1/XI/37  
`NA (sunset to moonset) was 14;30`

Rev. Line 5 (NW Planetary 30)  
1/XI/37  
`At that time, Sagmegar (Jupiter) was behind the Elbow of Pabi[lsag by ... cubits ...] (Sagittarius)`

Rev. Line 6 (NW Planetary 31)  
4/XI/37  
`The 4th, Dilbat (Venus) was ‘balanced’ 1/2 cubit below the Goat-Fish. (Capricorn)`

Rev. Line 6  
6/XI/37  
`Night of the 6th, evening watch, Sîn (Moon) was surrounded by a ‘fold’ (Halo), the Bristle (Pleiades), the Bull of Heaven (Taurus), the Chariot (Auriga) [stood within the ‘fold’ ...]`

Rev. Line 7  
7-15/XI/37  
`Sîn (Moon) was surrounded by a ‘fold’ (Halo); the Lion (Leo) and the Crab (Cancer) were inside {inside} the ‘fold’.`

Rev. Line 7 (NW Lunar 12)  
7-15/XI/37  
`The King (Regulus) was ‘balanced’ 1 cubit below Sîn (Moon).`

### Month XII

Rev. Line 12 (NW Lunar 14)  
1/XII/37  
`Addaru, the 1st, Sîn (Moon) appeared behind the Hired Man (Aries) while Šamaš was present`

Rev. Line 12 (Lunar Six 6)  
1/XII/37  
`NA (sunset to moonset) was 25`

Rev. Line 13 (NW Lunar 15)  
2/XII/37  
`Night of the 2nd, the evening watch, Sîn (Moon) was ‘balanced’ 4 cubits below the Stars (Pleiades).`

Rev. Line 14 (NW Lunar 16)  
7/XII/37  
`Night of the 7th, Sîn (Moon) was surrounded by a ‘fold’ (Halo), the Crab (Cancer) and the King (Regulus) were within [the ‘fold’, ...]`

Rev. Line 16 (Lunar Six 7)  
12/XII/37  
`The 12th, one god was seen with the (other) god, NA (sunrise to moonset) was 1;30.`

Rev. Line 17-18 (Planetary)  
13-21/XII/37  
`was in front of the Band of the Swallow (Pisces), 1/2 cubit below Dilbat (Venus), Šiḫṭu (Mercury) passing 8 fingers to  the east, when it appeared it was bright and high. 1 U[Š ... Kajjamānu (Saturn)] was ‘balanced’ 6 fingers above Šiḫṭu (Mercury) and 3 fingers below Dilbat (Venus)`

Rev. Line 19 (NW Planetary 32)  
20/XII/37  
`Around the 20th Dilbat (Venus) and Šiḫṭu (Mercury) entered the Band of the Swallow (Pisces).`

Note: NW 3, 9, 13, and 17 refer to
`one god was seen with the (other) god` (full moon) on lines Obv. 4,
Obv. 17, Rev. 7 and Rev. 16.

Results
-------

When testing years in the range -620 to -510 the best match is by far
-567:

    Year   Score
    -567 43.2681892738362
    -543 29.883735177719693
    -532 29.742077929325447
    -535 29.699561007050136
    -540 29.576665357941046
    ...
    -586 29.353515093459194
    -588 26.089988377496205
    -587 21.944461976993956

Calendar
--------

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 13%" />
<col style="width: 37%" />
<col style="width: 14%" />
<col style="width: 34%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th>Calendar Date</th>
<th>Event</th>
<th>Matched UT</th>
<th>Comment</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td>1/I/37</td>
<td>Calendar: First day of year</td>
<td>-567 April 22</td>
<td>Equinox on March 27</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>1/I/37</td>
<td>Calendar: Lunar Visibility</td>
<td>-567 April 22</td>
<td>Earliest visibility April 22</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>1/I/37</td>
<td>Moon appeared behind Taurus</td>
<td>-567 April 22</td>
<td>Moon 6.5° behind of ε Tauri</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>1/I/37</td>
<td>Saturn in front of the Swallow</td>
<td>-567 April 22</td>
<td>Saturn 16.0° ahead of 58 Piscium</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>9/I/37</td>
<td>Moon 1 cubit in front of β Virginis</td>
<td>No Match</td>
<td>(See below)</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>11/I/37</td>
<td>Jupiter rose to daylight (AR)</td>
<td>-567 May 02</td>
<td>Jupiter AR on April 30</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>14/I/37</td>
<td>NA (sunrise to moonset) was 4</td>
<td>-567 May 05</td>
<td>NA was 3.5°</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>1/II/37</td>
<td>Calendar: Lunar Visibility</td>
<td>-567 May 22</td>
<td>Earliest visibility May 21</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>1/II/37</td>
<td>Moon below β Geminorum</td>
<td>-567 May 22</td>
<td>Moon 7.5° below β Geminorum</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>1/II/37</td>
<td>Saturn in front of the Swallow</td>
<td>-567 May 22</td>
<td>Saturn 14.4° ahead of 58 Piscium</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>3-5/II/37</td>
<td>Mars was in the Praesepe</td>
<td>-567 May 24-26</td>
<td>Mars was 0.3° above 42 Cancri</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>10/II/37</td>
<td>Mercury rose in the west (EF)</td>
<td>-567 May 31</td>
<td>Mercury EF on June 01</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>10/II/37</td>
<td>Mercury behind Gemini</td>
<td>-567 May 31</td>
<td>Mercury 4.3° behind ω Geminorum</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>18/II/37</td>
<td>Venus 1 cubit 4 fingers above Regulus</td>
<td>-567 June 08</td>
<td>Venus 1.5° above Regulus</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>26/II/37</td>
<td>(KUR) (moonrise to sunrise) was 23</td>
<td>-567 June 16</td>
<td>KUR was 22.7°</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>1/III/37</td>
<td>Calendar: Lunar Visibility</td>
<td>-567 June 20</td>
<td>Earliest visibility June 20</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>1/III/37</td>
<td>Moon appeared behind Cancer</td>
<td>-567 June 20</td>
<td>Moon 11.2° behind of θ Cancri</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>1/III/37</td>
<td>NA (sunset to moonset) was 20</td>
<td>-567 June 20</td>
<td>NA was 22.4°</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>1/III/37</td>
<td>Mars 4 cubits in front of Regulus</td>
<td>-567 June 20</td>
<td>Mars was 7.4° ahead of Regulus</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>1/III/37</td>
<td>Mercury 4 cubits in front of Regulus</td>
<td>-567 June 20</td>
<td>Mercury was 7.7° ahead of Regulus</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>1/III/37</td>
<td>Mercury passed below Mars</td>
<td>-567 June 20</td>
<td>Mercury 0.5° below Mars</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>1/III/37</td>
<td>Jupiter was above Antares</td>
<td>-567 June 20</td>
<td>Jupiter 5.2° above Antares</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>1/III/37</td>
<td>Venus opposite θ Leonis</td>
<td>-567 June 20</td>
<td>Venus 8.5° below θ Leonis</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>5/III/37</td>
<td>Moon was in Leo</td>
<td>-567 June 24</td>
<td>Moon 34.1° behind 52 Leonis</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>8/III/37</td>
<td>Moon 2 1/2 cubits below β Librae</td>
<td>-567 June 27</td>
<td>Moon 5.5° below β Librae</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>10/III/37</td>
<td>Moon 3 1/2 cubits above Antares</td>
<td>-567 June 29</td>
<td>Moon 8.5° above Antares</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>12/III/37</td>
<td>Mars 2/3 of a cubit above Regulus</td>
<td>-567 July 01</td>
<td>Mars 1.0° above Regulus</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>15/III/37</td>
<td>NA (sunrise to moonset) was 7.5</td>
<td>-567 July 04</td>
<td>NA was 7.9°</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>15/III/37</td>
<td>Predicted Lunar Eclipse</td>
<td>-567 July 04</td>
<td>Partial Lunar Eclipse</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>1/X/37</td>
<td>Calendar: Lunar Visibility</td>
<td>-566 Jan 14</td>
<td>Earliest visibility Jan 14</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>19/X/37</td>
<td>Venus below β Capricorni</td>
<td>-566 Feb 01</td>
<td>Venus 4.1° below β Capricorni</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>1/XI/37</td>
<td>Calendar: Lunar Visibility</td>
<td>-566 Feb 12</td>
<td>Earliest visibility Feb 12</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>1/XI/37</td>
<td>Moon appeared in Pisces</td>
<td>-566 Feb 12</td>
<td>Moon 11.8° below 58 Piscium</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>1/XI/37</td>
<td>NA (sunset to moonset) was 14.5</td>
<td>-566 Feb 12</td>
<td>NA was 16.9°</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>1/XI/37</td>
<td>Jupiter in Sagittarius</td>
<td>-566 Feb 12</td>
<td>Jupiter was 8.3° above Ascella</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>4/XI/37</td>
<td>Venus 1/2 cubit below Capricorn</td>
<td>-566 Feb 15</td>
<td>Venus was 9.2° behind η Capricorni</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>6/XI/37</td>
<td>Pleiades within Lunar Halo</td>
<td>-566 Feb 17</td>
<td>Alcyone 18.2° from Moon</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>6/XI/37</td>
<td>Taurus within Lunar Halo</td>
<td>-566 Feb 17</td>
<td>ε Tauri 8.5° from Moon</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>6/XI/37</td>
<td>Auriga within Lunar Halo</td>
<td>-566 Feb 17</td>
<td>ν Aurigae 19.2° from Moon</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>7-15/XI/37</td>
<td>Leo and Cancer within Lunar Halo</td>
<td>-566 Feb 22</td>
<td>Moon in Leo and Cancer</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>7-15/XI/37</td>
<td>Regulus 1 cubit below Moon</td>
<td>-566 Feb 22</td>
<td>Regulus 2.8° below Moon</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>1/XII/37</td>
<td>Calendar: Lunar Visibility</td>
<td>-566 March 14</td>
<td>Earliest visibility March 14</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>1/XII/37</td>
<td>Moon appeared behind Aries</td>
<td>-566 March 14</td>
<td>Moon 10.5° below ν Arietis</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>1/XII/37</td>
<td>NA (sunset to moonset) was 25</td>
<td>-566 March 14</td>
<td>NA was 25.6°</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>2/XII/37</td>
<td>Moon 4 cubits below the Pleiades</td>
<td>-566 March 15</td>
<td>Moon 9.3° below Alcyone</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>7/XII/37</td>
<td>Crab within Lunar Halo</td>
<td>-566 March 20</td>
<td>Moon 5.7° behind θ Cancri</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>7/XII/37</td>
<td>Regulus within Lunar Halo</td>
<td>-566 March 20</td>
<td>Moon 14.9° behind Regulus</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>12/XII/37</td>
<td>NA (sunrise to moonset) was 1.5</td>
<td>-566 March 25</td>
<td>NA was 0.3°</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>13-21/XII/37</td>
<td>Mercury and Venus were together</td>
<td>-566 April 01</td>
<td>Venus was 2.2° from Mercury</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>20/XII/37</td>
<td>Venus entered Pisces</td>
<td>-566 April 02</td>
<td>Venus 8.1° below 58 Piscium</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>20/XII/37</td>
<td>Mercury entered Pisces</td>
<td>-566 April 02</td>
<td>Mercury 9.0° below 58 Piscium</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

My results match those of AJ Sachs and H Hunger.

All observations matched -567 except for Obv. Line 3 (9/I/37) where the
Moon was 11.1° behind β Virginis (-567 April 30), however the
observation would have matched for the 8th on -567 April 29 where the
Moon is 3.8° ahead of β Virginis. In Sachs and Hunger’s translation they
have written `Night of the 9th (error for: 8th)`

References
----------

\[1\] M. Ossendrijver, “Translating Babylonian Astronomical Diaries and
Procedure Texts,” *Translating Writings of Early Scholars in the Ancient
Near East, Egypt, Greece and Rome: Methodological Aspects with
Examples*, vol. 344, p. 125, 2016, \[Online\]. Available:
<https://www.degruyter.com/view/book/9783110448818/10.1515/9783110448818-005.xml>.

\[2\] P. V. Neugebauer and E. F. Weidner, *Ein astronomischer
Beobachtungstext aus dem 37. Jahre Nebukadnezars II.(-567/66): Sitzung
vom 1. Mai 1915*. BG Teubner, 1915, \[Online\]. Available:
<https://archive.org/details/einastronomische00neuguoft>.

\[3\] H. Hunger and A. J. Sachs, *Astronomical diaries and related texts
from Babylonia. Vol. 1, Diaries from 652 B.C. to 262 B.C. : Plates*.
Verlag der Österreichischen Akademie der Wissenschaften, 1988.

\[4\] D. Brown, *Mesopotamian Planetary Astronomy-astrology*. Styx
Publications, 2000.
